Steve Gary Wozniak is an electrical engineer and programmer, best known for co-founding Apple and developing the Apple 1 computer, the first true personal computer. Wozniak, commonly known as “Woz”, was born August 11th, 1950, in San Jose California to parents Margaret and Jerry Wozniak. He built his first basic computer at the age of 13. Wozniak attended Homestead High School in Cupertino California where he was an electronics prodigy. He graduated in 1968 and attended the University of Colorado Boulder for Computer Science but was thrown out in his first year for hacking the school's computer network. He restarted college at De Anza College near his home in Cupertino before transferring to University of California Berkeley in 1971. Wozniak worked at Hewlett-Packard for a short time designing calculators and working on mainframe computers.

At the age of 19 his life would change when he was introduced by a mutual friend to the then 14 year old Steve Jobs. Jobs had gotten a summer job at Hewlett-Packard. Outside of work, the two of them collaborated on their first business venture, to create an electronic “blue box”, a tool that allowed them to hack public telephones and make toll-free phone calls to anywhere in the world. During this time he dropped out of UC Berkeley to focus on his business opportunities while continuing to work at HP. Wozniak produced the boxes while Jobs handled the sales, with each going for $150. When they ran into trouble with the boxes, they moved on and collaborated on a number of projects designing and selling advanced circuit boards. This included a number of companies including building boards for Atari, and their new game, Breakout. 

In 1975 Wozniak began the development of a new home computer, what would eventually become the Apple I. It started as a prototype to impress friends at the Homebrew Computer Club in nearby Palo Alto California. He wanted to create a home computer that was user friendly and built for hobbyist. In June of that year, he tested the first working prototype, only running a basic program and displaying a few characters to a TV. But this was a massive achievement as it demonstrated the first time a home computer has produced a visual output to a display. Wozniak originally offered the design to his superiors at HP, but was denied multiple times. He was skeptical of making the design successful on his own but was eventually convinced by Jobs that it was worthwhile. To raise money for the plan, Wozniak sold his expensive calculators while Jobs sold his van.

In 1976 the two formed Apple Computer Company. Wozniak gave a demonstration of the capabilities of the completed Apple I to the Homebrew Computer Club, where it impressed Paul Terrell, the owner of a new computer store in Mountain View California. Paul offered to buy 50 units at $500 each, marking Apple's very first sales. The first production models were made in Job’s parents garage and delivered to Paul later that year. They would eventually produce a total of 200 Apple I kit computers. While still a small company, the two recognized there was a much larger market for these devices. 

Following this success, Apple managed to secure funding to continue building new home computers.. With this new money Wozniak was able to quit his job at HP, and focus solely on research and development at Apple. They continued to produce Apple I computers while Wozniak turned to the next project, the design of a new computer, the Apple II. It would be the first home computer to display color graphics, using a technique inspired by Atari arcade games of the time. It would also be the first personal computer that would have the BASIC programming language built in. However its development also marked the first rift between Wozniak and Jobs. The two strongly disagreed over the expandability that the Apple II should have, with Jobs only wanting two expansion slots while Wozniak wanted eight. This sparked a heated debate where Wozniak threatened that Jobs could “go get himself another computer”. However, Wozniak eventually won out. Apple unveiled the computer in 1977 and it became the first successful mass-produced home computer ever. 

In 1980 Apple went public, instantly making Wozniak a multi-millionaire. The company released the Apple III, designed to appeal to businesses, as they had seen that the Apple II was being purchased by small businesses and hobbyists alike. Wozniak had little to do with the development of the Apple III and it would turn out to be a commercial failure. He would later claim it failed because it was designed by Apple’s marketing team, not their engineers. Wozniak was busy designing the next generation of Apple computers with the Macintosh. It would be the first personal computer with a true graphical user interface, including a mouse cursor. However in 1981, in  the middle of development, disaster struck when Wozniak crashed a small plane he was not qualified to fly. He was injured in the crash, sustaining lasting injuries including amnesia. This stopped him from returning to work at Apple and would make him take a break from engineering altogether. Steve Jobs would take over the production of the Macintosh computer. 

Wozniak returned to University of California Berkeley to finish his degrees in electrical engineering and computer science. He also worked on creating a music festival called US Festivals, meant to combine rock music and technology. These however were complete failures. In 1983 Wozniak would return to Apple where he developed the Apple desktop bus, a component that allowed multiple low speed devices to be connected to a computer at the same time. However at the same time he increasingly disagreed with Jobs over the direction of the business. Jobs was ignoring the Apple II family, which still accounted for the majority of Apple’s profits, to push ahead with the Macintosh. Wozniak would state that the new Apple was stopping him from being who he wanted to be, an engineer, not a manager. He no longer believed that Apple needed him and in 1985 he left the company and sold the majority of his stock. 

After leaving Apple, Wozniak experimented doing different things he had wanted to do, but had been stopped by his obligations to Apple. One of his life long goals was to be a teacher. He taught computer classes to students in a nearby school for a short time and would continue to support the school with funding for much of his life. He created the first programmable universal TV remote in 1985, as well as a company called Wheels of Zeus to create consumer GPS technology in 2001.  In 1990 he helped found the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a non-profit fighting for digital rights. He created a holding company, Acquiror Technology for purchasing and developing technology companies. He would help co-found Silicon valley Comic Con along with Marvel comics legend Stan Lee in 2016. In 2017 he founded Woz U, an online technology education platform. In 2020 he created a cryptocurrency, WOZX, and in 2021 he co-founded Privateer Space to clean up space debris. 

Steve Wozniak is clearly one of the most influential software and hardware engineers of our time. He led the development of both the hardware and software for  the Apple I and Apple II computers, and to a lesser extent the original Macintosh. These devices were the first personal computers to enter the mainstream, and served as many peoples introduction to a computer. He helped introduce many fundamental technologies such as color displays and graphics interfaces, that we all take for granted today. Without Wozniak, there is no doubt that Apple would not be the company it is today. Although he left the company he remained on good terms with Jobs, and is still listed as an employee. He moved on to pursue a wide variety of things that interested him, from teaching to cryptocurrency. Wozniak has proven throughout his career that he is not motivated by profits, but by the pursuit of advancing technology and helping others, which he continues to do today. 
